Reflection

I would say that the Budget Tracker project gave me a chance to know Python in a more realistic manner. Prior to this project, I wasn’t familiar with the fundamental concept of OOP. I did not know how to use classes to structure my code, but everything became apparent once I created something. I have also learned about the functions that make a program manageable rather than placing all the notions of a program into a single long script.

One more valuable lesson that I was able to learn was how to manipulate the flow of a program with the help of loops and conditionals. Moreover, compiling the menu taught me to instruct the user in every step of the way and ensure that the program will respond in the right way based on their selection. I confidently would say that my handling of user inputs also improved. Previously my program would crash when somebody entered something wrong but now I would know how to validate the input.

There were some obstacles which I encountered. The summary totals caused me only one difficulty as I found it hard to debug when they would not display as planned. I had to make everything go one after the other and to know what my code was actually up to.The filter feature was confusing at first because sometimes it showed all transactions, and sometimes it showed none. The main issue was that categories were not matching due to uppercase/lowercase differences. I fixed it by converting everything to lowercase. I tested the filter step-by-step and printed values to understand what was happening. After simplifying my logic, the filter started working as I wanted.

To enhance the project, given that I had more time, I would save the data in files to prevent the loss of the transactions as I shut the program. Other things that I would do are make the menu more user friendly and give more error messages like the ones that would state what exactly went wrong rather than stating that there was an invalid input. I would consider adding some more sophisticated filters in the future, such as filters by dates or totals per month. In general, this project enabled me to become more familiar with Python and become more self-confident in my ability to write programs independently.